Author’s Biography
Victor Hugo was born on the 26th of February, 1802, at Besan?on, where his father, an officer in Moreau’s army, was commanding a battalion. His first three years were spent in Corsica; in 1805 his mother took her family to Paris, but rejoined her husband, at Avellino, in South Italy, in 1807. General Hugo, as the father presently became, was appointed a governor in Spain, from which the English under Wellington dislodged himself and his family in 1812. Returning to Paris, Victor was put to school until 1818, when he made up his mind that literature should be his profession. That he was still under classical influences was proved by his first volume, the 更多TXT下载，请到http://www.bbsxiaoshuo.com

“Odes et Poésies” of 1822. It gained him a pension from Louis XVIII, and was followed next year by his earliest novel, “Han d’Islande.” The romantic movement now spread to France, and Hugo was one of its earliest adherents; he took the lead in revolt by publishing his “Odes” in 1826 and his “Cromwell” in 1827. It was in the preface to the latter that his famous formula of the Romantic faith was issued. He first took a place, however, among the leading lyric poets of Europe with his “Orientales” of 1829. This was a crowning year in Victor Hugo’s career; it saw the production of “Hernani” and the composition of “Marion Delorme” and “Le Dernier Jour d’un Condamné.” From this time forth his plays, novels, and lyrical poems were poured forth in three parallel and continuous streams. “Notre-Dame de Paris” was published on the 13th of February, 1831. For the next ten years the life of Victor Hugo was one of continual prosperity and ever-ascending fame. Among his dramas, “Ruy Blas” belongs to 1838, and among the collections of his poems “Les Voix Intérieures” to 1837. He was elected to the French Academy in 1841 and created a peer of France in 1845. He had been in sympathy with the Government, but when the Royalists fell and Napoleon arrived on the scene, Victor Hugo became a violent radical. As a member of the Legislative Assembly he opposed the Coup d’état, and was exiled at the close of 1851, taking up his residence in Brussels. Here the violence of his attacks on Napoleon III led to his expulsion from Belgium, and in the summer of 1852 he settled at St. Héliers, in Jersey, whence he sent out the fierce sheaf of “Les Chatiments” in the following year. Jersey, in its turn, became too hot to hold him, and in the autumn of 1855 he took up his abode at Hauteville House, Guernsey, where he resided for fifteen years. His occupation during the earlier part of his stay at Guernsey was the composition of “La Légende des Siècles,” the first portion of which appeared in 1859. Victor Hugo’s huge novel, “Les Misérables,” was published in 1862, and his fantastic work on Shakespeare in 1864. Two grotesquely romantic novels, “Les Travailleurs de la Mer” and “L’Homme Qui Rit,” belong respectively to 1866 and 1869. The Napoleon dynasty having fallen, Hugo immediately reappeared in France (September 5, 1870) and endured his share of the sufferings of the siege of Paris. After somewhat unsuccessfully acting a part in the politics of reconstruction, Hugo withdrew to Brussels, from which town he was driven in May, 1871, for his expressed sympathy with the Paris Commune. He now retired from the feuds of politics and devoted himself mainly to poetry, only one novel, “Quatre-vingt-treize,” 1874, belonging to this latest period of his career. From December, 1871, the residence of Hugo was Paris, where he lived with his widowed daughter-in-law and her children; in 1875 he was elected a perpetual senator. For fourteen years he enjoyed, in full serenity and strength, the splendours of an old age of extreme celebrity; it was said that he entered, during his lifetime, into immortality. In the spring of 1885 he took a chill while riding, as he loved to do, on the outside of an omnibus. His heart gradually gave way, and he died on the 22d of May. He received from the city of Paris a funeral of extreme pomp, and the Panthéon was prepared for his reception, after the coffin had been lying in public state, for twenty-four hours, under the Arc de Triomphe.
E. G.
Author's Preface
To The Edition of 1832
The announcement that this edition was furnished with several fresh chapters was incorrect; they should have been described as hitherto unpublished. For, if by fresh one understands newly written, then the chapters added to this edition are not fresh ones. They were written at the same time as the rest of the work; they date from the same period, were engendered by the same thought, and from the first formed part of the manuscript of Notre-Dame de Paris. Moreover, the author cannot imagine adding new developments to a work of this nature, the thing being once finished and done with. That cannot be done at will. To his idea, a novel is, in a sense, necessarily born with all its chapters complete, a drama with all its scenes. Do not let us think there is anything arbitrary in the particular number of parts which go to make up that whole—that mysterious microcosm which we call a novel or a drama. Neither joins nor patches are ever effectual in such a work, which ought to be fashioned in a single piece, and so be left, as best may be. The thing once done, listen to no second thoughts; attempt no touchings up of the book once given to the world, its sex, virile or otherwise, once recognised and acknowledged; the child, having once uttered its first cry, is born, is fashioned in that way and no other; father or mother are powerless to alter it, it belongs to the air and the sun; let it live or die as it is. Is your book a failure? Tant pis, but do not add chapters to those which have already failed. Is it defective?—it should have been completed before birth. Your tree is gnarled? You will not straighten it out. Your novel phthisical, not viable? You will never give it the life that is lacking to it. Your drama is born lame? Believe me, it is futile to supply it with a wooden leg.
The author is therefore particularly anxious that the public should know that the interpolated chapters were not written expressly for this new edition. They were not included in the previous editions for a very simple reason. When Notre-Dame de Paris was being printed the first time, the packet of manuscript containing these chapters went astray, so that they would either have had to be rewritten or omitted. The author considered that the only chapters of real import were the two dealing specially with art and history, but that their omission would in no way disturb the course of the drama; and that the public being unconscious of their absence, he alone would be in the secret of this hiatus. He decided then for the omission, not only for the above reason, but because, it must be confessed, his indolence shrank affrighted from the task of rewriting the lost chapters. Rather would he have written a new book altogether.
Meanwhile, these chapters have reappeared, and the author seizes the first opportunity to restore them to their proper place, thus presenting his work complete—such as he imagined it, well or ill, lasting or perishable; but in the form he desired it to have.
Paris, October 20, 1832.
Author's Preface
To The Edition of 1831
Some years ago, when visiting, or, more properly speaking, thoroughly exploring the Cathedral of Notre-Dame, the writer came upon the word
’ANáGKH1
graven on the wall in a dim corner of one of the towers.
In the outline and slope of these Greek capitals, black with age and deeply scored into the stone, there were certain peculiarities characteristic of Gothic calligraphy which at once betrayed the hand of the medi?val scribe.
But most of all, the writer was struck by the dark and fateful significance of the word; and he pondered long and deeply over the identity of that anguished soul that would not quit the world without imprinting this stigma of crime or misfortune on the brow of the ancient edifice.
Since then the wall has been plastered over or scraped—I forget which—and the inscription has disappeared. For thus, during the past two hundred years, have the marvellous churches of the Middle Ages been treated. Defacement and mutilation have been their portion—both from within and from without. The priest plasters them over, the architect scrapes them; finally the people come and demolish them altogether.
Hence, save only the perishable memento dedicated to it here by the author of this book, nothing remains of the mysterious word graven on the sombre tower of Notre-Dame, nothing of the unknown destiny it so mournfully recorded. The man who inscribed that word passed centuries ago from among men; the word, in its turn, has been effaced from the wall of the Cathedral; soon, perhaps, the Cathedral itself will have vanished from the face of the earth.
This word, then, the writer has taken for the text of his book.
February, 1831.
___________________
1 Fate, destiny.
BOOK I
Chapter 1 - The Great Hall
Precisely three hundred and forty-eight years six months and nineteen days ago1 Paris was awakened by the sound of the pealing of all the bells within the triple enclosing walls of the city, the Univeristy, and the town.
Yet the 6th of January, 1482, was not a day of which history has preserved the record. There was nothing of peculiar note in the event which set all the bells and the good people of Paris thus in motion from early dawn. It was neither an assault by Picards or Burgundians, nor a holy image carried in procession, nor a riot of the students in the vineyard of Laas, nor the entry into the city of “our most dread Lord the King,” nor even a fine stringing up of thieves, male and female, at the Justice of Paris. Neither was it the unexpected arrival, so frequent in the fifteenth century, of some foreign ambassador with his beplumed and gold-laced retinue. Scarce two days had elapsed since the last cavalcade of this description, that of the Flemish envoys charged with the mission to conclude the marriage between the Dauphin and Margaret of Flanders, had made its entry into Paris, to the great annoyance of Monsieur the Cardinal of Bourbon, who, to please the King, had been obliged to extend a gracious reception to this boorish company of Flemish burgomasters, and entertain them in his H?tel de Bourbon with a “most pleasant morality play, drollery, and farce,” while a torrent of rain drenched the splendid tapestries at his door.
The 6th of January, which “set the whole population of Paris in a stir,” as Jehan de Troyes relates, was the date of the double festival—united since time immemorial—of the Three Kings, and the Feast of Fools.
On this day there was invariably a bonfire on the Place de Gréve, a may-pole in front of the Chapelle de Braque, and a mystery-play at the Palais de Justice, as had been proclaimed with blare of trumpets on the preceding day in all the streets by Monsieur the Provost’s men, arrayed in tabards of violet camlet with great white crosses on the breast.
The stream of people accordingly made their way in the morning from all parts of the town, their shops and houses being closed, to one or other of these points named. Each one had chosen his share of the entertainments—some the bonfire, some the may-pole, others the Mystery. To the credit of the traditional good sense of the Paris “cit” be it said that the majority of the spectators directed their steps towards the bonfire, which was entirely seasonable, or the Mystery, which was to be performed under roof and cover in the great Hall of the Palais de Justice, and were unanimous in leaving the poor scantily decked may-pole to shiver alone under the January sky in the cemetery of the Chapelle de Braque.
The crowd flocked thickest in the approaches to the Palais, as it was known that the Flemish envoys intended to be present at the performance of the Mystery, and the election of the Pope of Fools, which was likewise to take place in the great Hall.
It was no easy matter that day to penetrate into the great Hall, then reputed the largest roofed-in space in the world. (It is true that, at that time, Sauval had not yet measured the great hall of the Castle of Montargis.) To the gazers from the windows, the square in front of the Palais, packed as it was with people, presented the aspect of a lake into which five or six streets, like so many river mouths, were each moment pouring fresh floods of heads. The ever-swelling waves of this multitude broke against the angles of the houses, which projected here and there, like promontories, into the irregular basin of the Place.
In the centre of the high Gothic 2 fa?de of the Palais was the great flight of steps, incessantly occupied by a double stream ascending and descending, which, after being broken by the intermediate landing, spread in broad waves over the two lateral flights.
Down this great stair-case the crowd poured continuously into the Place like a cascade into a lake, the shouts, the laughter, the trampling of thousands of feet making a mighty clamour and tumult. From time to time the uproar redoubled, the current which bore the crowd towards the grand stairs was choked, thrown back, and formed into eddies, when some archer thrust back the crowd, or the horse of one of the provost’s men kicked out to restore order; an admirable tradition which has been faithfully handed down through the centuries to our present gendarmerie of Paris.
Every door and window and roof swarmed with good, placid, honest burgher faces gazing at the Palais and at the crowd, and asking no better amusement. For there are many people in Paris quite content to be the spectators of spectators; and to us a wall, behind which something is going on, is a sufficiently exciting spectacle.
If we of the nineteenth century could mingle in imagination with these Parisians of the fifteenth century, could push our way with that hustling, elbowing, stamping crowd into the immense Hall of the Palais, so cramped on that 6th of January, 1482, the scene would not be without interest or charm for us, and we would find ourselves surrounded by things so old that to us they would appear quite new.
With the reader’s permission we will attempt to evoke in thought the impression he would have experienced in crossing with us the threshold of that great Hall amid that throng in surcoat, doublet, and kirtle.
At first there is nothing but a dull roar in our ears and a dazzle in our eyes. Overhead, a roof of double Gothic arches, panelled with carved wood, painted azure blue, and diapered with golden fleur de lis; underfoot, a pavement in alternate squares of black and white. A few paces off is an enormous pillar, and another—seven in all down the length of the hall, supporing in the centre line the springing arches of the double groining. Around the first four pillars are stalls all glittering with glassware and trinkets, and around the last three are oaken benches, worn smooth and shining by the breeches of the litigants and the gowns of the attorneys. Ranged along the lofty walls, between the doors, between the windows, between the pillars, is the interminable series of statues of the rulers of France from Pharamond downward; the “Rois fainèants,” with drooping eyes and indolent hanging arms; the valiant warrior kings, with head and hands boldly uplifted in the sight of heaven. The tall, pointed windows glow in a thousand colours; at the wide entrances to the Hall are richly carved doors; and the whole—roof, pillars, walls, cornices, doors, statues—is resplendent from top to bottom in a coating of blue and gold, already somewhat tarnished at the period of which we write, but which had almost entirely disappeared under dust and cobwebs in the year of grace 1549, when Du Breuil alluded to it in terms of admiration, but from hearsay only.
Now let the reader picture to himself that immense, oblong Hall under the wan light of a January morning and invaded by a motley, noisy crowd, pouring along the walls and eddying round the pillars, and he will have some idea of the scene as a whole, the peculiarities of which we will presently endeavour to describe more in detail.
Assuredly if Ravaillac had not assassinated Henri IV there would have been no documents relating to his trial to be deposited in the Record office of the Palais de Justice; no accomplices interested in causing those documents to disappear, and consequently no incendiaries compelled, in default of a better expedient, to set fire to the Record office in order to destroy the documents, and to burn down the Palais de Justice in order to burn the Record office—in short, no conflagration of 1618. The old Palais would still be standing with its great Hall, and I could say to the reader “Go and see for yourself,” and we should both be exempt of the necessity, I of writing, he of reading this description, such as it is. All of which goes to prove the novel truth, that great events have incalculable consequences.
To be sure, it is quite possible that Ravaillac had no accomplices, also that, even if he had, they were in no way accessory to the fire of 1618. There exist two other highly plausible explanations. In the first place, the great fiery star a foot wide and an ell high, which, as every mother’s son knows, fell from heaven on to the Palais on the 7th of March just after midnight; and secondly, Thèophile’s quatrain, which runs:
“Certes, ce fut un triste jeu
Quand á Paris dame Justice,
Pour avoir mangè trop d’èpice
Se mit tout le palais en feu.”3
Whatever one may think of this triple explanation—political, physical, and poetical—of the burning of the Palais de Justice in 1618, about one fact there is unfortunately no doubt, and that is the fire itself.
Thanks to this disaster, and more still to the successive restorations which destroyed what the fire had spared, very little remains of this first residence of the Kings of France, of this original palace of the Louvre, so old even in the time of Philip the Fair, that in it they sought for traces of the magnificent buildings erected by King Robert and described by Helgaldus. Nearly all has gone. What has become of the Chancery Chamber in which St. Louis “consummated his marriage”? what of the garden where he administered justice, “clad in a jerkin of camlet, a surcoat of coarse woollen stuff without sleeves, and over all a mantle of black ’sandal,’ and reclining on a carpet with Joinville”? Where is the chamber of the Emperor Sigismund? where that of Charles IV? that of John Lackland? Where is the flight of steps from which Charles VI proclaimed his “Edict of Pardon”? the flag-stone whereon, in the presence of the Dauphin, Marcel strangled Robert de Clermont and the Marshal de Champange? the wicket where the bulls of the anti-Pope Benedict were torn up, and through which the bearers of them marched out, mitred and coped in mock state, to publicly make the amende honorable through the streets of Paris? and the great Hall with its blue and gold, its Gothic windows, its statues, its pillars, its immense vaulted roof so profusely carved —and the gilded chamber—and the stone lion kneeling at the door with head abased and tail between its legs, like the lions of Solomon’s throne, in that attitude of humility which beseems Strength in the presence of Justice? and the beautiful doors, and the gorgeous-hued windows, and the wrought iron-work which discouraged Biscornette—and the delicate cabinet-work of Du Hancy? How has time, how has man, served these marvels? What have they given us in exchange for all this, for this great page of Gallic history, for all this Gothic art? The uncouth, surbased arches of M. de Brosse, the clumsy architect of the great door of Saint-Gervais— so much for art; and as regards history, we have the gossipy memoirs of the Great Pillar, which still resounds with the old wives’ tales of such men as Patru.
Well, that is not much to boast of. Let us return to the real great Hall of the real old Palais.
The two extremities of this huge parallelogram were occupied, the one by the famous marble table, so long, so broad, and so thick that, say the old territorial records in a style that would whet the appetite of a Gargantua, “Never was such a slab of marble seen in the world”; the other by the chapel in which Louis XI caused his statue to be sculptured kneeling in front of the Virgin, and to which he had transferred—indifferent to the fact that thereby two niches were empty in the line of royal statues—those of Charlemagne and Saint-Louis: two saints who, as Kings of France, he supposed to be high in favour in heaven. This chapel, which was still quite new, having been built scarcely six years, was carried out entirely in that charming style of delicate architecture, with its marvellous stone-work, its bold and exquisite tracery, which marks in France the end of the Gothic period, and lasts on into the middle of the sixteenth century in the ethereal fantasies of the Renaissance. The little fretted stone rose-window above the door was in particular a master-piece of grace and lightness—a star of lace.
In the centre of the Hall, opposite the great entrance, they had erected for the convenience of the Flemish envoys and other great personages invited to witness the performance of the Mystery, a raised platform covered with gold brocade and fixed against the wall, to which a special entrance had been contrived by utilizing a window into the passage from the Gilded Chamber.
According to custom, the performance was to take place upon the marble table, which had been prepared for that purpose since the morning. On the magnificent slab, all scored by the heels of the law-clerks, stood a high wooden erection, the upper floor of which, visible from every part of the Hall, was to serve as the stage, while its interior, hung round with draperies, furnished a dressing-room for the actors. A ladder, frankly placed in full view of the audience, formed the connecting link between stage and dressing-room, and served the double office of entrance and exit. There was no character however unexpected, no change of scene, no stage effect, but was obliged to clamber up this ladder. Dear and guileless infancy of art and of stage machinery!
Four sergeants of the provost of the Palais—the appointed superintendents of all popular holidays, whether festivals or executions—stood on duty at the four corners of the marble table.
The piece was not to commence till the last stroke of noon of the great clock of the Palais. To be sure, this was very late for a theatrical performance; but they had been obliged to suit the convenience of the ambassadors.
Now, all this multitude had been waiting since the early morning; indeed, a considerable number of these worthy spectators had stood shivering and chattering their teeth with cold since break of day before the grand stair-case of the Palais; some even declared that they had spent the night in front of the great entrance to make sure of being the first to get in. The crowd became denser every moment, and like water that overflows its boundaries, began to mount the walls, to surge round the pillars, to rise up and cover the cornices, the window-sills, every projection and every coign of vantage in architecture or sculpture. The all-prevailing impatience, discomfort, and weariness, the license of a holiday approvedly dedicated to folly, the quarrels incessantly arising out of a sharp elbow or an iron-shod heel, the fatigue of long waiting —all conduced to give a tone of bitterness and acerbity to the clamour of this closely packed, squeezed, hustled, stifled throng long before the hour at which the ambassadors were expected. Nothing was to be heard but grumbling and imprecations against the Flemings, the Cardinal de Bourbon, the Chief Magistrate, Madame Marguerite of Austria, the beadles, the cold, the heat, the bad weather, the Bishop of Paris, the Fools’ Pope, the pillars, the statues, this closed door, yonder open window—to the huge diversion of the bands of scholars and lackeys distributed through the crowd, who mingled their gibes and pranks with this seething mass of dissatisfaction, aggravating the general ill-humour by perpetual pin-pricks.
There was one group in particular of these joyous young demons who, after knocking out the glass of a window, had boldly seated themselves in the frame, from whence they could cast their gaze and their banter by turns at the crowd inside the Hall and that outside in the Place. By their aping gestures, their yells of laughter, by their loud interchange of opprobrious epithets with comrades at the other side of the Hall, it was very evident that these budding literati by no means shared the boredom and fatigue of the rest of the gathering, and that they knew very well how to extract out of the scene actually before them sufficient entertainment of their own to enable them to wait patiently for the other.
“Why, by my soul, ’tis Joannes Frollo de Molendino!” cried one of them to a little fair-haired imp with a handsome mischievous face, who had swarmed up the pillar and was clinging to the foliage of its capital; “well are you named Jehan of the Mill, for your two arms and legs are just like the sails of a wind-mill. How long have you been here?”
“By the grace of the devil,” returned Joannes Frollo, “over four hours, and I sincerely trust they may be deducted from my time in purgatory. I heard the eight chanters of the King of Sicily start High Mass at seven in the Sainte-Chapelle.”
“Fine chanters forsooth!” exclaimed the other, “their voices are sharper than the peaks of their caps! The King had done better, before founding a Mass in honour of M. Saint-John, to inquire if M. Saint-John was fond of hearing Latin droned with a Proven?al accent.”
“And was it just for the sake of employing these rascally chanters of the King of Sicily that he did that?” cried an old woman bitterly in the crowd beneath the window. “I ask you—a thousand livres parisis4 for a Mass, and that too to be charged on the license for selling salt-water fish in the fish-market of Paris.”
“Peace! old woman,” replied a portly and solemn personage, who was holding his nose as he stood beside the fishwife; “a Mass had to be founded. Would you have the King fall sick again?”
“Bravely said, Sir Gilles Lecornu,5 master furrier to the royal wardrobe!” cried the little scholar clinging to the capital.
A burst of laughter from the whole band of scholars greeted the unfortunate name of the hapless Court furrier.
“Lecornu! Gilles Lecornu!” shouted some.
“Cornitus et hirsutus!” 6 responded another.
“Why, of course,” continued the little wretch on the capital. “But what is there to laugh about? A worthy man is Gilles Lecornu, brother to Master Jehan Lecornu, provost of the Royal Palais, son of Master Mahiet Lecornu, head keeper of the Forest of Vincennes, all good citizens of Paris, married every one of them from father to son!”
The mirth redoubled. The portly furrier answered never a word, but did his best to escape the attention directed to him from all sides; but he puffed and panted in vain. Like a wedge being driven into wood, his struggles only served to fix his broad apoplectic face, purple with anger and vexation, more firmly between the shoulders of his neighbours.
At last one of these neighbours, fat, pursy, and worthy as himself, came to his aid.
“Out upon these graceless scholars who dare to address a burgher in such a manner! In my day they would have first been beaten with sticks, and then burnt on them.”
This set the whole band agog.
“Holá! hè! what tune’s this? Who’s that old bird of ill omen?”
“Oh, I know him!” exclaimed one; “it’s Ma?tre Andry Musnier.”
“Yes, he’s one of the four booksellers by appointment to the University,” said another.
“Everything goes by fours in that shop!” cried a third. “Four nations, four faculties, four holidays, four procurators, four electors, four booksellers.”
“Very good,” returned Jehan Frollo, “we’ll quadruple the devil for them.”
“Musnier, we’ll burn thy books.”
“Musnier, we’ll beat thy servants.”
“Musnier, we’ll tickle thy wife.”
“The good, plump Mlle. Oudarde.”
“Who is as buxom and merry as if she were already a widow.”
“The devil fly away with you all,” growled Ma?tre Andry Musnier.
“Ma?tre Andry,” said Jehan, still hanging fast to his capital, “hold thy tongue, or I fall plump on thy head.”
Ma?tre Andry looked up, appeared to calculate for a moment the height of the pillar and the weight of the little rascal, mentally multiplied that weight by the square of the velocity —and held his peace. Whereupon Jehan, left master of the field, added triumphantly, “And I’d do it too, though I am the brother of an archdeacon.”
“A fine set of gentlemen those of ours at the University, not even on a day like this do they see that we get our rights. There’s a may-pole and a bonfire in the town, a Fools’ Pope and Flemish ambassadors in the city, but at the University, nothing!”
“And yet the Place Maubert is large enough,” observed one of the youngsters, ensconced in a corner of the window-ledge.
“Down with the Rector, the electors, and the procurators!” yelled Jehan.
“We’ll make a bonfire to-night in the Champs-Gaillard with Ma?tre Andry’s books!” added another.
“And the desks of the scribes!” cried his neighbour.
“And the wands of the beadles!”
“And the spittoons of the deans!”
“And the muniment chests of the procurators!”
“And the tubs of the doctors!”
“And the stools of the Rector!”
“Down!” bellowed little Jehan in a roaring bass; “down with Ma?tre Andry, the beadles and the scribes; down with the theologians, the physicians, and the priests; down with the procurators, the electors, and the Rector!!”
“ ’Tis the end of the world!” muttered Ma?tre Andry, stopping his ears.
“Talk of the Rector—there he goes down the square!” cried one of those in the window. And they all strained to catch a glimpse.
“Is it in truth our venerable Rector, Ma?tre Thibaut?” inquired Jehan Frollo du Moulin, who from his pillar in the interior of the Hall could see nothing of what went on outside.
“Yes, yes,” responded the others in chorus, “it is Ma?tre Thibaut, the Rector himself.”
It was in fact the Rector, accompanied by all the dignitaries of the University going in procession to receive the ambassadors, and in the act of crossing the Place du Palais. The scholars crowding at the window greeted them as they passed with gibes and ironical plaudits. The Rector marching at the head of his band received the first volley—it was a heavy one.
“Good-day, Monsieur the Rector—Holá there! Good-day to you!”
“How comes it that the old gambler has managed to be here? Has he then actually left his dice?”
“Look at him jogging alone on his mule—its ears are not as long as his own!”
“Holá, good-day to you Monsieur the Rector Thibaut! Tybalde aleator!7 old numskull! old gamester!”
“God save you! How often did you throw double six last night?”
“Oh, just look at the lantern-jawed old face of him—all livid and drawn and battered from his love of dice and gaming!”
“Where are you off to like that, Thibaut, Tybalde ad dados, 8 turning your back on the University and trotting towards the town?”
“Doubtless he is going to seek a lodging in the Rue Thibautodè!” 9 cried Jehan Frollo.
The whole ribald crew repeated the pun in a voice of thunder and with furious clapping of hands.
“You are off to seek a lodging in the Rue Thibautodè, aren’t you, Monsieur the Rector, own partner to the devil!”
Now came the turn of the other dignitaries.
“Down with the beadles! Down with the mace-bearers!”
“Tell me, Robin Poussepain, who is that one over there?”
“It is Gilbert de Suilly, Gilbertus de Soliaco, the Chancellor of the College of Autun.”
“Here, take my shoe—you have a better place than I have—throw it in his face!”
“Saturnalitias mittimus ecce nuces!” 10
“Down with the six theologians in their white surplices!”
“Are those the theologians? I took them for the six white geese Sainte-Geneviéve pays to the Town as tribute for the fief of Roogny.”
“Down with the physicians!”
“Down with all the pompous and squabbling disputations!”
“Here goes my cap at thy head, Chancellor of Sainte-Geneviéve; I owe thee a grudge. He gave my place in the Nation of Normandy to little Ascaino Falzaspada, who as an Italian, belongs of right to the Province of Bourges.”
“ ’Tis an injustice!” cried the scholars in chorus. “Down with the Chancellor of Sainte-Geneviéve!”
“Ho, there, Ma?tre Joachim de Ladehors! Ho, Louis Dahuille! Ho, Lambert Hoctement!”
“The devil choke the Procurator of the Nation of Germany!”
“And the chaplains of the Sainte-Chapelle in their gray amices; cum tunicis grisis!”
“Seu de pellibus grisis fourratis!”
“There go the Masters of Art! Oh, the fine red copes! and oh, the fine black ones!”
“That makes a fine tail for the Rector!”
“He might be the Doge of Venice going to espouse the sea.”
“Look, Jehan, the canons of Sainte-Geneviéve!”
“The foul fiend take the whole lot of them!”
“Abbè Claude Choart! Doctor Claude Choart, do you seek Marie la Giffarde?”
“You’ll find her in the Rue Glatigny.”
“Bed-making for the King of the Bawdies!”
“She pays her fourpence—quatuor denarios.”
“Aut unum bombum.”
“Would you have her pay you with one on the nose?”
“Comrades! Ma?tre Simon Sanguin, the elector of the Nation of Picardy, with his wife on the saddle behind him.”
“Post equitem sedet atra cura.” 11
“Good-day to you, Monsieur the Elector!”
“Good-night to you, Madame the Electress!”
“Lucky dogs to be able to see all that!” sighed Joannes de Molendino, still perched among the acanthus leaves of his capital.
Meanwhile the bookseller of the University, Ma?tre Andry Musnier, leaned over and whispered to the Court furrier, Ma?tre Gilles Lecornu:
“I tell you, monsieur, ’tis the end of the world. Never has there been such unbridled license among the scholars. It all comes of these accursed inventions—they ruin everything—the artillery, the culverine, the blunderbuss, and above all, printing, that second pestilence brought us from Germany. No more manuscripts—no more books! Printing gives the death-blow to bookselling. It is the beginning of the end.”
“I, too, am well aware of it by the increasing preference for velvet stuffs,” said the furrier.
At that moment it struck twelve.
A long-drawn “Ah!” went up from the crowd.
The scholars held their peace. There ensued a general stir and upheaval, a great shuffling of feet and movement of heads, much coughing and blowing of noses; everyone resettled himself, rose on tip-toe, placed himself in the most favourable position obtainable. Then deep silence, every neck outstretched, every mouth agape, every eye fixed on the marble table. Nothing appeared; only the four sergeants were still at their posts, stiff and motionless as four painted statues. Next, all eyes turned towards the platform reserved for the Flemish envoys. The door remained closed and the platform empty. Since daybreak the multitude had been waiting for three things—the hour of noon, the Flemish ambassadors, and the Mystery-Play. Noon alone had kept the appointment. It was too bad. They waited one, two, three, five minutes—a quarter of an hour—nothing happened. Then anger followed on the heels of impatience; indignant words flew hither and thither, though in suppressed tones as yet. “The Mystery, the Mystery!” they murmured sullenly. The temper of the crowd began to rise rapidly. The warning growls of the gathering storm rumbled overhead. It was Jehan du Moulin who struck out the first flash.
“Let’s have the Mystery, and the devil take the Flemings!” he cried at the pitch of his voice, coiling himself about his pillar like a serpent.
The multitude clapped its approval.
“The Mystery, the Mystery!” they repeated, “and to the devil with all Flanders!”
“Give us the Mystery at once,” continued the scholar, “or it’s my advice we hang the provost of the Palais by way of both Comedy and Morality.”
“Well said!” shouted the crowd, “and let’s begin the hanging by stringing up his sergeants.”
A great roar of applause followed. The four poor devils grew pale and glanced apprehensively at one another. The multitude surged towards them, and they already saw the frail wooden balustrade that formed the only barrier between them and the crowd bulge and give way under the pressure from without.
The moment was critical.
“At them! At them!” came from all sides.
At that instant the curtain of the dressing-room we have described was raised to give passage to a personage, the mere sight of whom suddenly arrested the crowd, and, as if by magic, transformed its anger into curiosity.
“Silence! Silence!”
But slightly reassured and trembling in every limb, the person in question advanced to the edge of the marble table with a profusion of bows which, the nearer he approached, assumed more and more the character of genuflections.
By this time quiet had been gradually restored, and there only remained that faint hum which always rises out of the silence of a great crowd.
“Messieurs the bourgeois,” he began, “and Mesdemoiselles the bourgeoises, we shall have the honour of declaiming and performing before his Eminence Monsieur the Cardinal a very fine Morality entitled ’The Good Judgment of Our Lady the Virgin Mary.’ I play Jupiter. His Eminence accompanies at this moment the most honourable Embassy of the Duke of Austria, just now engaged in listening to the harangue of Monsieur the Rector of the University at the Porte Baudets. As soon as the Most Reverend the Cardinal arrives we will commence.”
Certainly nothing less than the direct intervention of Jupiter could have saved the four unhappy sergeants of the provost of the Palais from destruction. Were we so fortunate as to have invented this most veracious history and were therefore liable to be called to task for it by Our Lady of Criticism, not against us could the classical rule be cited, Nec deus intersit.
For the rest, the costume of Seigneur Jupiter was very fine, and had contributed not a little towards soothing the crowd by occupying its whole attention. Jupiter was arrayed in a “brigandine” or shirt of mail of black velvet thickly studded with gilt nails, on his head was a helmet embellished with silver-gilt buttons, and but for the rouge and the great beard which covered respectively the upper and lower half of his face, but for the roll of gilded pasteboard in his hand studded with iron spikes and bristling with jagged strips of tinsel, which experienced eyes at once recognised as the dread thunder-bolt, and were it not for his flesh-coloured feet, sandalled and beribboned á la Grecque, you would have been very apt to mistake him for one of M. de Berry’s company of Breton archers.
